Feature/mtm 53705/notification2 reference improvements (#1228)
SoftwareAG/c8y-docs: content/reference/notifications-bundle/overview.md

The 'temperature' topic is receiving measurements from the leftmost and centrally depicted subscriptions.
Both of these have a managed-object context and they both include messages from the measurement api only.
A subscription with a managed-object context can only forward messages from a specific managed-object (such as a device).
The leftmost subscription is forwarding measurements from a device with source id '12345' and
the centrally depicted one the same but from device '67890'.

The 'alarms' topic is receiving alarms from the rightmost subscription. It has a tenant context and includes messages from 
the alarm api. It will forward all alarms within the tenant that creates the subscription, regardless of how they are generated 
(finer grained topics can be created using filters).
The forwarded alarms will include those raised by {{< product-c8y-iot >}} itself, and those published via REST or MQTT from other components in, or attached to,
the platform, including any alarms raised by the depicted devices.

![Notification 2.0 topics and subscriptions diagram](/images/reference-guide/notification2/notification2-subscriptions.svg)

> ### Consumers and tokens

Author: I've deliberately avoided the conventional meaning of subscription and implying it with subscriber. I've favored use of consumer and client only.

I've also started referring to topic (or 'subscription topics'): we used to incorrectly say stuff such as 'use a token to receive from a subscription' when in fact it receives from a topic. Other cases might exist (these help aavoid using the word subscription fro anything other than the object we create using REST.

> ### Consumers and tokens

Reviewer: Sure, to be honest I'm fine with what you've done - it's consistent and clarifies the points of confusion as much as possible without actually changing the names of things in the API.  If nobody else wants to offer a competing argument I have no objections to going with it as it is.

A topic's notification messages can be received by WebSocket based consumers that present a valid authorizing
token for that specific topic when connecting to the Notification 2.0 WebSocket endpoint.
This token is in the form of a string conforming to the JWT (JSON Web Token) standard. Tokens can be obtained from the
{{< product-c8y-iot >}}  [token](https://{{<domain-c8y>}}/api/{{< c8y-current-version >}}/#tag/Tokens) REST API by authenticated users.

Consumers receive the topic messages reliably, with at-least-once semantics, in order and must acknowledge each message in turn.
Notification order is preserved from the point of view of any given device sending in REST and MQTT API requests.
The protocol is text-based and described in detail in the [Consumer protocol](../notifications/#consumer-protocol) section.
In typical usage, multiple consumers of a given topic operate independently in parallel, each receiving and acknowledging
separate copies of those messages.

{{< c8y-admon-caution >}}
It is important to manage consumers carefully as they can place significant storage resource demands on a system.
Consumers should only be created (connected) if they are to be active, 

> and should be unsubscribed if they are no longer needed or not needed for long periods.

Author: Yep - good suggestion

> and should be unsubscribed if they are no longer needed or not needed for long periods.

Author: Done

> and should be unsubscribed if they are no longer needed or not needed for long periods.

Author: We now link to the location the new improved examples will be (within the next week - most likely before the doc is released). Also a link to Java clients Notification2 classes/package.

See the [Consumer lifecycle](../notifications/#consumer-lifecycle) section for more details.
{{< /c8y-admon-caution >}}

> The diagram below shows 3 consumer (backlogs) have been created in the Messaging Service by four consumer clients.

Author: Yeah - I thought I caught that (maybe there were 2). Agree and will change

> The diagram below shows 3 consumer (backlogs) have been created in the Messaging Service by four consumer clients.

Author: Done

allowing the consumer to not miss messages during connection outages, but comes at a cost of explicit lifecycle management.

![Notification 2.0 consumer backlog lifecycle](/images/reference-guide/notification2/notifications2-backlog-lifecycle.svg)

There are two ways unsubscribe a consumer:
* Pass the token as the **token** parameter to the
  [/notification2/unsubscribe](https://{{<domain-c8y>}}/api/{{< c8y-current-version >}}/#operation/postNotificationTokenUnsubscribeResource) REST endpoint.
* Send the message `unsubscribe_subscriber` from the consumer's connected WebSocket client.
  This will unsubscribe the consumer and close the connection (as shown in the diagram above). If the client experiences
  a connection failure while unsubscribing in this manner, there is no way to be certain the unsubscribe message was 
  successfully received and processed by the Messaging Service.
  Therefore, under such circumstances, the client should always reconnect and send the message again to be sure the
  unsubscribe action has taken effect.

### Creating subscriptions

> The JSON fields sent in a [create subscription request](https://{{<domain-c8y>}}/api/{{< c8y-current-version >}}/#operation/postNotificationSubscriptionResource)

Author: I'll find out about this - only an issue when backporting I think and any backport is subject to backporting policy anyway.

Anyway, the lower part of the path seems to be different in 1017 to that which is generated in develop (the URL base path variable has different structure in these branches). Probably also different in 1016 but maybe there are content variations too (maybe we haven't backported all API changes or the matching doc changes).

https://cumulocity.com/api/core/10.17.0/#operation/postNotificationTokenResource
https://cumulocity.com/api/10.19.0/#operation/postNotificationTokenUnsubscribeResource

> The JSON fields sent in a [create subscription request](https://{{<domain-c8y>}}/api/{{< c8y-current-version >}}/#operation/postNotificationSubscriptionResource)

Author: The branch variations are managed by variables so not an issue.

Whether and where to backport and removing content that is not present in a release will come on each backport if we do them

> The JSON fields sent in a [create subscription request](https://{{<domain-c8y>}}/api/{{< c8y-current-version >}}/#operation/postNotificationSubscriptionResource)

Author: ... so Done

determine which {{< product-c8y-iot >}} messages are forwarded to a topic, and the forwarded message content.
This request must be made by an authenticated Cumulocity IoT user with the ROLE_NOTIFICATION_2_ADMIN role.

The **context** field broadly determines the type of {{< product-c8y-iot >}} message a subscription might match and forward.

> There are two valid **context** values: "mo" (managed-object) and "tenant" and each only supports a subset of the available JSON fields, as follows:

Author: Done in a find-replace in editor

> There are two valid **context** values: "mo" (managed-object) and "tenant" and each only supports a subset of the available JSON fields, as follows:

Reviewer: Yes, confirmed that "managed-" no longer appears anywhere, thanks.

> The **source** fields can only be used if the **context** is "mo". It must be the value of a managed-object's global identifier 

Author: @sagscmi Your suggestion seems to be saying we have a source.id field nesting - we have a source field only. MOs have a source.id nested field.
Am I missing your point here. Not the nicest bit of this section - that's for sure. So happy to consider rewriting it

> The **source** fields can only be used if the **context** is "mo". It must be the value of a managed-object's global identifier 

Reviewer: I'm trying not to reply to everything immediately, but one of us seems to be missing something here.  The `/notification2/subscription` request body has a `source` which is an object with nested `id` and `name` fields, as shown in the example POST request:
```
{
  "source": {
    "id": "251982"
  },
  "context": "mo",
  "subscription": "testSubscription",
  "subscriptionFilter": {
    "apis": [
      "measurements",
      "events"
    ],
    "typeFilter": "c8y_Speed"
  },
  "fragmentsToCopy": [
    "c8y_MaxSpeedMeasurement"
  ],
  "nonPersistent": false
}
```
Nobody ever uses the `name` so IMHO having the structure is pointless, but it is what we expect people to use. Anyway, that's what I was referring to, although I didn't express it very well.

> The **source** fields can only be used if the **context** is "mo". It must be the value of a managed-object's global identifier 

Author: That's what I thought you were referring to and thought you were wrong. I thought it was on only one layer but now assuming I must be miss-remembering this.

I'll change it (I'll double check first)

> The **source** fields can only be used if the **context** is "mo". It must be the value of a managed-object's global identifier 

Reviewer: If I'm correct, feel free to re-word the whole sentence as I wasn't overly happy with my attempt anyway.

> The **source** fields can only be used if the **context** is "mo". It must be the value of a managed-object's global identifier 

Author: Yeah - It's either that or I change the world ... starting with the OpenAPI doc. The first step is the hardest!

> The **source** fields can only be used if the **context** is "mo". It must be the value of a managed-object's global identifier 

Author: Done and fixed the small examples too

> The **source** fields can only be used if the **context** is "mo". It must be the value of a managed-object's global identifier 

Reviewer: Yes, that's much better now.

<td nowrap="nowrap">source</td>
<td>A managed object global identifier</td>
<td>Required if context is "mo"</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td nowrap="nowrap">subscription</td>
<td>String</td>
<td>Required</td>
<td>Determines messaging-service topic used</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td nowrap="nowrap">nonPersistent</td>
<td>Boolean</td>
<td>false</td>
<td>Determines if a persistent or non-persistent topic is used</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td nowrap="nowrap">filter</td>
<td>JSON object</td>
<td>All messages</td>
<td>Includes messages based on message values</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td nowrap="nowrap">fragmentsToCopy</td>
<td>JSON list of strings</td>
<td>All fragments</td>
<td>Determines which fragments are included in forwarded messages.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Notifications for new managed-objects creations can never be forwarded by subscriptions with an "mo" **context** as the 
managed-object is only given an id when it is created and that id is needed as a field to create the subscription.
Therefore, to receive notifications informing of new managed-object creations, a subscription with "tenant" **context** 
must be created to listen for them.
An application can use this to discover new managed-objects.

> It can then choose to create subscriptions with "mo" **context** for those managed-objects.

Author: Done. Not 100% sure of accuracy. I think mo context must still use manageobjects API to get them and that they are also received in tenant context with manageobjects API. That would make sense

> It can then choose to create subscriptions with "mo" **context** for those managed-objects.

Reviewer: I think that is correct, although you might want to ask @rohitjoshi-softwareag or @sag-tjegorow to absolutely confirm it.

It is also possible to subscribe to all alarms or events that are generated in a tenant using "tenant" **context**.

<a name="subscription-filter">&nbsp;</a>
### Subscription filters
Subscription filters provide fine-grained selection of the {{< product-c8y-iot >}} messages a subscription will forward.
Filters can be provided as the **subscriptionFilter** field in a subscription's JSON object at creation time. 
It is a JSON object with **apis** and **typeFilter** fields.  
Filters specified by subscriptions with "tenant" **context** *must* provide a **typeFilter** value.
Filters specified by those with "mo" **context** can provide either or both filter fields.

The **apis** field is a JSON array that specifies which {{< product-c8y-iot >}} API messages to include.
Use an array containing just the wildcard value, "*", to include messages from all APIs. 
To include messages from a subset of the APIs, use an array containing any single or multiple selection from 

> "alarms", "alarms with children", "events", "events with children", "measurements", "managed objects" and "operations".

Author: Yeah - what was I thinking (maybe copied from somewhere they were list as a description - and not as parameters)

<tr>
<td nowrap="nowrap">shared</td>
<td>Boolean</td>
<td>false</td>
<td>True if multiple clients can act collectively as this consumer.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td nowrap="nowrap">expiresInMinutes</td>
<td>Integer</td>
<td>1440</td>
<td>The token duration</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### Token expiration

A token's lifetime is determined at creation time by the optional **expiresInMinutes** field, which defaults to "1440" (one day, expressed in minutes).
This can be used to limit exposure to potential security issues related to them being leaked to parties that should not be authorized to the access the system.
Consequently, tokens may need to be re-created or refreshed periodically.

Tokens can be refreshed calling the token create request with the same parameters as originally 
(a different **expiresInMinutes** value can be given if a different duration is desired). 
The token string is a JWT (JSON Web Token) token so if the parameters used are not easily kept available, 
they can be extracted from the token string as outlined in Java code below:
```java
// The token string's sections are delimited by dots.
String[] tokenParts = token.split("\\.");
// Base64 decode the second section

> // byte[] decoded = Base64.getDecoder().decode(tokenParts[1]);

Reviewer: issue: Commented out line declares (or actually doesn't as it's commented out) a variable that is then used two lines further down... TBH I think you could fold this section into the previous one and ditch the code snippet that clearly nobody has ever tried to run.

Reviewer: My bad, I thought this was existing code that had been moved from somewhere else.  I was suggesting combining the "Creating tokens" and "Token expiration" into one section, maybe "Token management" or similar.  However you've convinced me that the code snippet is worth keeping around so let's leave it as it is.

// Create a string from the decoded bytes to get a JSON string of the token fields
String tokenJson = new String(decoded);
// ... optionally create an Object from the string or bytes using a JSON  parser
```

> If you are using the {{< product-c8y-iot >}} Java SDK[TokenApi](https://github.com/SoftwareAG/cumulocity-clients-java/blob/develop/java-client/src/main/java/com/cumulocity/sdk/client/messaging/notifications/TokenApi.java) 
> class, it has a public refresh method which does the above for you (internally on the client side).

Reviewer: typo/nitpick:
```suggestion
If you are using the {{< product-c8y-iot >}} Java SDK [TokenApi](https://github.com/SoftwareAG/cumulocity-clients-java/blob/develop/java-client/src/main/java/com/cumulocity/sdk/client/messaging/notifications/TokenApi.java) 
class, it has a public refresh method which does the above for you, internally on the client side.
```

<a name="shared-tokens">&nbsp;</a>

> ### Shared consumer tokens

Reviewer: note: There are a lot of things highlighted with `backquotes` in this section where you've used **bold** above for the same thing.  I know this is old material and TBH it doesn't need to change immediately, but we should try to be consistent in our formatting.

Author: I'm going to do a formatting pass over the doc (once I recheck the guidelines) shortly. There might be a different between code and field formatting. And there's value formatting.

However, it does not yet support all of the notifications available from the Real-time notification API so it is not yet a complete replacement for the older API.
See the rest of this section and the detailed API documentation for full details of the notifications supported by this release of the Notifications 2.0 API.

### Topics and subscriptions
Internally, Notifications 2.0 uses a [publish-subscribe](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Publish%E2%80%93subscribe_pattern)

> pattern, allowing use-cases to organise their desired selections of measurement, event, alarm and/or inventory messages 

Reviewer 2: suggestion: I think operations too.

into topics according to functional interest.
Creating a Notification 2.0 [subscription](https://{{<domain-c8y>}}/api/{{< c8y-current-version >}}/#tag/Subscriptions)

> within {{< product-c8y-iot >}} creates a publisher (internally), that will forward {{< product-c8y-iot >}} messages that it matches (based 

Reviewer 2: nitpick: I guess (internally) is redundant since you have already mentioned within.

Author: I don't think it is but might change 'within' to 'in'.
The subscription is created in (within) Cumulocity.

I add in brackets the the publisher is internal to Cumulocity as that is slightly unconventional: usually a 'client' application publishes (and thus creates a publisher externally). I want to emphasize that creating a subscription does this internally so they (user/developer) are clear they don't have to.

If anything I would prefer to lose the earlier in (within), but again, want to emphasize that the object lives in c8y (we have a horrendously unconventional usage of the word 'subscription')

The rightmost client identifies its consumer as 'alarmmonitor" and that consumer receives messages from the "alarms" subscription topic. 

The second to right client identifies its consumer as 'tempaudit" and that consumer receives messages from the "temperature" subscription topic.

The leftmost two consumer clients are two shares of a (logically single) [shared consumer](../notifications/#shared-tokens),
and so share the same copy of topic messages. They both identify the same "tempmonitor" consumer; each receives a non-overlapping subset
of the messages in the "temperature" topic.
Collectively, they receive all of the messages in the topic.

![Notification 2.0 consumers and consumer clients diagram](/images/reference-guide/notification2/notification2-consumers.svg)

<a name="consumer-lifecycle">&nbsp;</a>
### Consumer lifecycle

When a subscription is created, {{< product-c8y-iot >}} starts to create and forward notifications within the subscription's scope 
to the Messaging Service subsystem. The Message Service does not necessarily retain these messages; it only retains a 

> subscription topic's messages if the topic is persistent and it has at least one known consumer.

Reviewer 2: thought: may be clarify that it can be a disconnected consumer too?

Author: I was trying to imply that by saying '_known_ consumer', but maybe that is too subtle. I'll look at this

Author: changed '... at least one known consumer' 
to '... at least one consumer for the topic that is or has been connected.

Therefore, all consumer backlogs should be considered to have a storage cost from when they first connect until 
they explicitly express no further interest in the topic by unsubscribing.
The Messaging Service discards a given message only when there are no backlogs that reference it anymore.

The following diagram shows the lifecycle of a consumer backlog in relation to its associated client connection(s).
The backlog is created when the consumer first connects to the Messaging Service and is only destroyed when it is explicitly unsubscribed.
The consumer's backlog is maintained, even if its client connection is interrupted. This is needed for reliable messaging, 
allowing the consumer to not miss messages during connection outages, but comes at a cost of explicit lifecycle management.

![Notification 2.0 consumer backlog lifecycle](/images/reference-guide/notification2/notifications2-backlog-lifecycle.svg)

There are two ways unsubscribe a consumer:
* Pass the token as the **token** parameter to the
  [/notification2/unsubscribe](https://{{<domain-c8y>}}/api/{{< c8y-current-version >}}/#operation/postNotificationTokenUnsubscribeResource) REST endpoint.

> * Send the message `unsubscribe_subscriber` from the consumer's connected WebSocket client.

Reviewer 2: I understand. If you can change the diagram, please do. If not, create a follow on PR?

> * Send the message `unsubscribe_subscriber` from the consumer's connected WebSocket client.

Author: ... damn, the diagram says 'unsubscribe_consumer'. That's wrong I guess (I'll check).

I may go with you here (hide it customers) as it clashes with out subscription object (concept).
This is the one place subscription/subscriber is used correctly (conventionally). We can't/shouldn't expose it to avoid overloading the term. 

Our subscription object is actually a topic-include-filter. And that's all it is.

> * Send the message `unsubscribe_subscriber` from the consumer's connected WebSocket client.

Author: Now only refer to REST unsubscribe approach and have updated diagram (a few additional change that hopefully are improvement too).

Done

determine which {{< product-c8y-iot >}} messages are forwarded to a topic, and the forwarded message content.
This request must be made by an authenticated {{< product-c8y-iot >}} user with the `ROLE_NOTIFICATION_2_ADMIN` role.

The **context** field broadly determines the type of {{< product-c8y-iot >}} message a subscription might match and forward.
There are two valid **context** values: "mo" (managed object) and "tenant". Some subscription fields have 
constraints that vary according to the value of the **context** field. Where this is the case, it is pointed out in that field's 
documentation in the [create subscription](https://{{<domain-c8y>}}/api/{{< c8y-current-version >}}/#operation/postNotificationSubscriptionResource) documentation.

The **source** field can only be used if the **context** is "mo". It must have a nested **id** field containing the 
value of a managed object's global identifier (sometimes referred to as a 'device id' or 'source id').
This is used to target inclusion of messages from the given managed object.

> **subscription** is the first of two fields that identify which topic this subscription will forward messages to.

Reviewer 2: thought: maybe clarify that this is the subscription name and translates it to the topic name internally. Also worth reiterating that this name does not have to be unique.

Author: I think that saying it identifies a topic is sufficient (it's not the Ops Doc). Such a topic conversation has to involve the nonPersistent field also. 

That and the non-unique aspect is covered in the existing sentence that follows I think: 'Multiple subscriptions will contribute to a single topic if they have they same values for both the subscription and nonPersistent fields'

BTW, I've not anywhere stated that subscriptions have names as they don't. Horrendously, subscriptions have subscriptions!!!

Author: BTW continued ... I don't want us to cause customers/users to look for the name field in a subscription is my reason for being strict about not calling it a name anywhere (even though I informally do so in conversation sometimes)

Reviewer 2: Well, the subscribers are subscriptions in our case and the subscription field is really a topic name. Anyways, agreed.

Multiple subscriptions will contribute to a single topic if they have they same values for both the **subscription** and **nonPersistent** fields.

The **nonPersistent** field determines if the topic is [persistent or nonPersistent](../notifications/#non-persistent-topics).
Subscriptions with the same **subscription** field value, but different **nonPersistent** values forward to two different topics.
It is, therefore, the second of the two fields that identify the subscription topic. 

The **filter** field can provide a [subscription filter](../notifications/#subscription-filter), allowing more finely 
grained selection of the included messages, based upon the message **type** and API (is it a measurement or alarm, for example). 

The **fragmentsToCopy** field allows the forwarded messages to be transformed so that they contain only a specific subset
of the fragments present in the original {{< product-c8y-iot >}} messages they are generated from. This can be useful, for example,
for security, bandwidth saving or functionality scoping reasons. 

> The following summarizes the subscription fields.

Reviewer 2: nitpick: IMO unnecessary detail and I would just link to the API docs.

Author: The summary tables are to help make the field descriptions above more comprehensible (trying to add order after an explosion of terms).

can contribute notifications to a given topic so this does not control the topic lifecycle.
Deleting all the subscriptions associated with a topic will ensure no more notifications are added to it. This does not 
delete the topic either.

Even though the topic will no longer accumulate new messages, there may still be consumers draining 
the last of the messages from it. When all messages are consumed by all consumers, the topic will be empty and consume 
negligible space in the Messaging Service.

Subscriptions can be deleted by sending a [delete subscription request](https://{{<domain-c8y>}}/api/{{< c8y-current-version >}}/#operation/deleteNotificationSubscriptionResource), 
using the subscription's **id** as the URL filename. For example to delete subscription with id 8765:

```text
 DELETE /notification2/subscriptions/8765 HTTP/1.1
 Host: <HOST>
 Authentication: Basic: <AUTHENTICATION>
```

When a tenant is deleted from {{< product-c8y-iot >}}, all its subscriptions will be deleted. However, topics and consumers may 
still be active in the Messaging Service until all messages are consumed.

### Creating Tokens 

> The JSON fields sent in a [create token request](https://{{<domain-c8y>}}/api/{{< c8y-current-version >}}/#operation/postNotificationTokenResource)

Reviewer 2: suggestion: It's worth mentioning that consumers are not booted out once connected using a token even if it expires. Tokens are only validated when consumers first connect and will not be booted out as long as the current session holds.

Author: Good point

Author: I've add an admon-info to the Token expiry section for this.

Done

for security, bandwidth saving or functionality scoping reasons. 

The following summarizes the subscription fields.
<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th nowrap="nowrap">Field Name&nbsp;</th>
<th>Value</th>
<th>Required/Default</th>
<th>Description</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td nowrap="nowrap">context</td>
<td>"mo" or "tenant"</td>
<td>Required</td>
<td>Only values "mo" and "tenant" are supported</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td nowrap="nowrap">source</td>
<td>A managed object global identifier</td>
<td>Required if context is "mo"</td>
<td>Has a mandatory child <b>id</b> field</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td nowrap="nowrap">subscription</td>
<td>String</td>
<td>Required</td>
<td>Determines messaging-service topic used</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td nowrap="nowrap">nonPersistent</td>
<td>Boolean</td>
<td>false</td>
<td>Determines if a persistent or non-persistent topic is used</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td nowrap="nowrap">filter</td>
<td>JSON object</td>
<td>All messages</td>
<td>Includes messages based on message values</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td nowrap="nowrap">fragmentsToCopy</td>
<td>JSON list of strings</td>
<td>All fragments</td>

> <td>Determines which fragments are included in forwarded messages.</td>

Author: ```suggestion
<td>Determines which fragments are included in forwarded messages</td>
```

> <td>Determines which fragments are included in forwarded messages.</td>

Author: Done (removed odd one)

Persistent subscriptions are the default. They are used for reliable messaging, ensuring that consumers never miss a 
message if their connection is interrupted.
They use replicated secondary storage to maintain backlogs (within the constraints of any configured storage limits)
and to maintain the consumers' positions in their topics.
When a consumer of a persistent subscription topic has their connection interrupted,
whether that is due to network issues or deliberate actions by the consumer,
upon reconnection they will continue to receive notifications from the topic position they were at before the outage
(specifically, from the message after the last one they acknowledged successfully before the outage).

Non-persistent subscriptions are only buffered in memory. A client consumer's position is not persisted across
interruptions of the client connection.
When a consumer of a non-persistent subscription has their connection interrupted,
upon reconnection they will start receiving notifications from the most recent message of the subscription,
missing all other notifications that occurred during the connection outage.

> This will be the case for all such temporarily disconnected consumers,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is the case for all such temporarily disconnected consumers,
```

even if other consumers of the same non-persistent subscription
are still receiving older messages that occurred while it was not connected.

{{< c8y-admon-info >}}
If you create both a persistent and a non-persistent subscription with the same **subscription** field,

> they are *separate*, independent subscriptions, backed by separate topics.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
they are separate, independent subscriptions, backed by separate topics.
```

When creating a token for a non-persistent subscription topic, to access notifications from the correct topic, 
the token's **nonPersistent** field must be set to `true`.
As is the case for the subscription, this field defaults to `false`, meaning the token will be for a persistent 
subscription topic by default.
{{< /c8y-admon-info >}}

### Deleting subscriptions

> Deleting a subscription will prevent it adding further notification messages to its associated topic. Many subscriptions 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Deleting a subscription prevents it from adding further notification messages to its associated topic. Many subscriptions 
```

can contribute notifications to a given topic so this does not control the topic lifecycle.

> Deleting all the subscriptions associated with a topic will ensure no more notifications are added to it. This does not 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Deleting all the subscriptions associated with a topic ensures no more notifications are added to it. This does not 
```

delete the topic either.

> Even though the topic will no longer accumulate new messages, there may still be consumers draining 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Even though the topic no longer accumulates new messages, there may still be consumers draining 
```

> the last of the messages from it. When all messages are consumed by all consumers, the topic will be empty and consume 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the last of the messages from it. When all messages are consumed by all consumers, the topic is empty and consumes
```

negligible space in the Messaging Service.

Subscriptions can be deleted by sending a [delete subscription request](https://{{<domain-c8y>}}/api/{{< c8y-current-version >}}/#operation/deleteNotificationSubscriptionResource), 

> using the subscription's **id** as the URL filename. For example to delete subscription with id 8765:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
using the subscription's **id** as the URL filename. For example, to delete the subscription with ID 8765:
```

```text
 DELETE /notification2/subscriptions/8765 HTTP/1.1
 Host: <HOST>
 Authentication: Basic: <AUTHENTICATION>
```

> When a tenant is deleted from {{< product-c8y-iot >}}, all its subscriptions will be deleted. However, topics and consumers may 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When a tenant is deleted from {{< product-c8y-iot >}}, all its subscriptions are deleted. However, topics and consumers may 
```

still be active in the Messaging Service until all messages are consumed.

### Creating Tokens 
The JSON fields sent in a [create token request](https://{{<domain-c8y>}}/api/{{< c8y-current-version >}}/#operation/postNotificationTokenResource)
determine which subscription topic a consumer can receive messages from, the token's duration, 
the [shared](../notifications/#shared-tokens) nature of the consumer, and an identifier for the consumer.
This request must be made by an authenticated {{< product-c8y-iot >}} user with the `ROLE_NOTIFICATION_2_ADMIN` role.

The **subscription** field aligns with the same field in the subscription object, so broadly specifies the subscription
topic the consumer will receive notifications from. The **nonPersistent** field is also a factor in identifying the topic.

The **nonPersistent** field aligns with the same field in the subscription object so identifies whether the subscription topic

> is [persistent or nonPersistent](../notifications/#non-persistent-topics) and therefore is a factor in identifying the topic only. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
is [persistent or non-persistent](../notifications/#non-persistent-topics) and therefore is a factor in identifying the topic only. 
```

There is no such thing as a peristent or non-peristent consumer 
and tokens cannot affect the nature they experience of topics using this field. 

The **subscriber** field provides a unique (within the scope of this topic) identity for the consumer, allowing 

> it to be recognised across connection interruptions, so allowing message delivery to be resumed after such interruptions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
it to be recognized across connection interruptions, so allowing message delivery to be resumed after such interruptions
```

Author: Done with suggestion but not auto-resolving

> and thus reliable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and thus be reliable.
```
double-check intended meaning

The **shared** field determines if multiple clients can connect in parallel as the consumer identified in the 
**subscriber** field, acting collectively to share the notification message processing load.

> The **expiresInMinutes** field is the period that this token will remain valid for, defaulting to "1440" minutes (1 day).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The **expiresInMinutes** field is the period that this token remains valid for, defaulting to 1440 minutes (1 day).
```

The following summarizes the token fields.
<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th nowrap="nowrap">Field Name&nbsp;</th>
<th>Value</th>
<th>Required/Default</th>
<th>Description</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td nowrap="nowrap">subscription</td>
<td>string</td>
<td>Required</td>
<td>Identifies topic</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td nowrap="nowrap">nonPersistent</td>
<td>Boolean</td>
<td>false</td>

> <td>Must be true to identify a nonPersistent topic</td>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
<td>Must be true to identify a non-persistent topic</td>
```

</tr>
<tr>
<td nowrap="nowrap">subscriber</td>
<td>String</td>
<td>Required</td>
<td>Identifies the consumer bearing this token</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td nowrap="nowrap">shared</td>
<td>Boolean</td>
<td>false</td>

> <td>True if multiple clients can act collectively as this consumer.</td>

Author: Removed odd full-stop (all without now)

Done

</tr>
<tr>
<td nowrap="nowrap">expiresInMinutes</td>
<td>Integer</td>
<td>1440</td>
<td>The token duration</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### Token expiration

> A token's lifetime is determined at creation time by the optional **expiresInMinutes** field, which defaults to "1440" (one day, expressed in minutes).

Author: I've rewritten this line using same language as line 373 (adding 'lifetime' term in brackets) and added 'creation time' context to sentence.
@rssag I'm not sure if this has addressed you concern or not. Happy to try again if not right.

> A token's lifetime is determined at creation time by the optional **expiresInMinutes** field, which defaults to "1440" (one day, expressed in minutes).

Reviewer 3: should be good :) resolving

This can be used to limit exposure to potential security issues related to them being leaked to parties that should not be authorized to the access the system.
Consequently, tokens may need to be re-created or refreshed periodically.

{{< c8y-admon-info >}}

> Tokens *only* allow a consumer to connect to the Messaging Service. If a token expires while its consumer is connected, 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Tokens only allow a consumer to connect to the Messaging Service. If a token expires while its consumer is connected, 
```

the consumer is not automatically logged out or disconnected.

> If a consumer disconnects, and their token has expired, the token will have to be recreated or refreshed in order that the consumer can reconnect. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If a consumer disconnects, and their token has expired, the token must be recreated or refreshed in order that the consumer can reconnect. 
```

{{< /c8y-admon-info >}}

Tokens can be refreshed by calling the token create request with the same parameters as originally 
(a different **expiresInMinutes** value can be given if a different duration is desired). 
The token string is a JWT (JSON Web Token) token so if the parameters used are not easily kept available, 
they can be extracted from the token string as outlined in the Java code below:
```java

> // The token string's sections are delimited by dots.

Author: ```suggestion
// The token string's sections are delimited by dots
```

> they can be extracted from the token string as outlined in Java code below:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
they can be extracted from the token string as outlined in the Java code below:
```

String[] tokenParts = token.split("\\.");

> // Base64 decode the second section

Reviewer 3: probably out of scope, since these are JAVA comments, but the first ends with "." and from here they do not :) could be consistent

Author: Removed the full-stop from the one comment that one.

Done

The rightmost client identifies its consumer as 'alarmmonitor" and that consumer receives messages from the "alarms" subscription topic. 

The second to right client identifies its consumer as 'tempaudit" and that consumer receives messages from the "temperature" subscription topic.

The leftmost two consumer clients are two shares of a (logically single) [shared consumer](../notifications/#shared-tokens),
and so share the same copy of topic messages. They both identify the same "tempmonitor" consumer; each receives a non-overlapping subset
of the messages in the "temperature" topic.
Collectively, they receive all of the messages in the topic.

![Notification 2.0 consumers and consumer clients diagram](/images/reference-guide/notification2/notification2-consumers.svg)

<a name="consumer-lifecycle">&nbsp;</a>
### Consumer lifecycle

When a subscription is created, {{< product-c8y-iot >}} starts to create and forward notifications within the subscription's scope 
to the Messaging Service subsystem. The Message Service does not necessarily retain these messages; it only retains a 

> subscription topic's messages if the topic is persistent, and it has at least one consumer for the topic that is or has been connected.

Author: okay

{{< c8y-admon-info >}}
Tokens *only* allow a consumer to connect to the Messaging Service. If a token expires while its consumer is connected, 
the consumer is not automatically logged out or disconnected.

If a consumer disconnects, and their token has expired, the token will have to be recreated or refreshed in order that the consumer can reconnect. 
{{< /c8y-admon-info >}}

Tokens can be refreshed by calling the token create request with the same parameters as originally 
(a different **expiresInMinutes** value can be given if a different duration is desired). 
The token string is a JWT (JSON Web Token) token so if the parameters used are not easily kept available, 
they can be extracted from the token string as outlined in Java code below:
```java
// The token string's sections are delimited by dots.
String[] tokenParts = token.split("\\.");
// Base64 decode the second section
byte[] decoded = Base64.getDecoder().decode(tokenParts[1]);
// Create a string from the decoded bytes to get a JSON string of the token fields
String tokenJson = new String(decoded);
// ... optionally create an Object from the string or bytes using a JSON  parser

> ```

Reviewer 4: IMO we don't need to tell customers how our internal token structure looks like.

Author: We don't need to, but this is useful information that may simplify how a customer implements their consumer (or consumer management). Without this, they need a variable (or other storage) to remember each token field in order to recreate it. 

Ideally the 'refresh' functionality would be provided as a REST endpoint - maybe when we introduced some for of consumer management there might be other options too. 

I'd like to keep this

For example: two consumers identifying themselves as *instance1* and *instance2* connect using URL paths
`notification2/consumer?token=xyz&consumer=instance1` and `notification2/consumer?token=xyz&consumer=instance2`.

Subscriptions are always unaware of the nature and number of their consumers: any number of shared and exclusive tokens 
can be created for the same subscription and they all operate independently, 
each receiving their own copy of the notifications.
This means you can have multiple shared tokens for the same subscription topic and their load is only divided within the scope of each shared token.

### Building consuming microservices and applications

For Java developers, the API and the protocol have been wrapped up as an open Java API and a sample WebSocket client application. Any WebSocket library or programming language can be used as the protocol is text-based and relatively simple. Consumer can be either microservices or applications running externally from {{< product-c8y-iot >}} and require only a JWT string when connecting.

> There is a sample microservice available in the [cumulocity-examples repository](https://github.com/SoftwareAG/cumulocity-examples/tree/develop/hello-world-notification-microservice), so Java developers do not need to code to the protocol specification directly.

Reviewer: todo: Confirm with @rohitjoshi-softwareag that this is still the best URL to use for the samples.

Author: Done - updated URL for that which will be valid in about a week's time and changed (hopefully improved conversation around it with new link to C8y clients library)

If a consumer's token is not shared, the consumer is an *exclusive* consumer.
Only one consumer client can connect using an exclusive token. An attempt to connect further consumers with the same exclusive token results in an error.
An exclusive consumer receives a copy of all notifications from the subscription topic its token is for.

If a consumer's token is shared, the consumer is a *shared consumer*. Additional consumer clients can connect using the same token.
If only one shared consumer client is connected, it receives a copy of all notifications from the subscription topic.
As additional consumer clients connect using the same token, the consumer notification load is rebalanced so that 
each consumer client receives a non-overlapping subset (share) of the notifications from the subscription topic. 
The set of consumer clients sharing a token can be thought of as a single logical consumer.
Collectively, the set receives all notifications for the subscription topic. 

The notification load is spread across the shared consumer clients according to the **id** of the source that generated the notification, typically a device **id**.

> All notifications for a given **id** will be delivered to the same consumer. Each consumer may receive notifications for many different **id**s.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
All notifications for a given **id** are delivered to the same consumer. Each consumer may receive notifications for many different **id**s.
```

Subscriptions are always unaware of the nature and number of their consumers: any number of shared and exclusive tokens 
can be created for the same subscription topic and they all operate independently, 
each receiving their own copy of the notifications.
This means you can have multiple shared tokens for the same subscription topic and their load is only divided within the scope of each shared token.

### Building consuming applications and microservices

A consumer client requires only a valid URL and JWT string to connect.
It can be implemented using any WebSocket library or programming language as the protocol is text-based and relatively simple.
The implementation can be a microservice running internally to, or an application running externally from, {{< product-c8y-iot >}}.

Java developers do not need to code to the protocol specification directly. 
The API and the protocol have been implemented in the [Cumulocity Clients Java API](https://github.com/SoftwareAG/cumulocity-clients-java/tree/develop/java-client/src/main/java/com/cumulocity/sdk/client/messaging/notifications)
. Examples using that can be found

> in the [cumulocity-examples repository](https://github.com/SoftwareAG/cumulocity-examples/tree/develop/notification2-examples),

Author: ```suggestion
in the [cumulocity-examples repository](https://github.com/SoftwareAG/cumulocity-examples/tree/develop/notification2-examples).
```

> in the [cumulocity-examples repository](https://github.com/SoftwareAG/cumulocity-examples/tree/develop/notification2-examples),

Author: Corrected to a full-stop

Done
